# 0000. get started

[Maatwebsite/Laravel-Excel: Supercharged Excel exports and imports in Laravel](https://github.com/Maatwebsite/Laravel-Excel)

使用 3.1 版本的，laravel 用 6.0 以及 php 7.1 以上。

[Introduction | Laravel Excel](https://docs.laravel-excel.com/3.1/getting-started/)

## 01. Introduction

Laravel Excel is intended at being Laravel-flavoured PhpSpreadsheet: a simple, but elegant wrapper around PhpSpreadsheet with the goal of simplifying exports and imports. PhpSpreadsheet is a library written in pure PHP and providing a set of classes that allow you to read from and to write to different spreadsheet file formats, like Excel and LibreOffice Calc.

Laravel Excel Features: 1) Easily export collections to Excel. 2) Export queries with automatic chunking for better performance. 3) Queue exports for better performance. 4) Easily export Blade views to Excel. 5) Easily import to collections. 6) Read the Excel file in chunks. 7) Handle the import inserts in batches.

## 02. Installation

Requirements:

PHP: ^7.0

Laravel: ^5.5

PhpSpreadsheet: ^1.6

PHP extension php_zip enabled

PHP extension php_xml enabled

PHP extension php_gd2 enabled

Require this package in the composer.json of your Laravel project. This will download the package and PhpSpreadsheet.

    composer require maatwebsite/excel

The Maatwebsite\Excel\ExcelServiceProvider is auto-discovered and registered by default. If you want to register it yourself, add the ServiceProvider in config/app.php:

```php
'providers' => [
    /*
     * Package Service Providers...
     */
    Maatwebsite\Excel\ExcelServiceProvider::class,
]
```

The Excel facade is also auto-discovered. If you want to add it manually, add the Facade in config/app.php:

```php
'aliases' => [
    ...
    'Excel' => Maatwebsite\Excel\Facades\Excel::class,
]
```

To publish the config, run the vendor publish command:

    php artisan vendor:publish --provider="Maatwebsite\Excel\ExcelServiceProvider"

This will create a new config file named config/excel.php.
