[Highest Voted 'php' Questions - Page 1 - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/php?tab=votes&page=1&pagesize=15)

## 01. Reference — What does this symbol mean in PHP?

What is this?
This is a collection of questions that come up every now and then about syntax in PHP. This is also a Community Wiki, so everyone is invited to participate in maintaining this list.

Why is this?
It used to be hard to find questions about operators and other syntax tokens.¹
The main idea is to have links to existing questions on Stack Overflow, so it's easier for us to reference them, not to copy over content from the PHP Manual.

Note: Since January 2013, Stack Overflow does support special characters. Just surround the search terms by quotes, e.g. [php] "==" vs "==="

What should I do here?
If you have been pointed here by someone because you have asked such a question, please find the particular syntax below. The linked pages to the PHP manual along with the linked questions will likely answer your question then. If so, you are encouraged to upvote the answer. This list is not meant as a substitute to the help others provided.

The List
If your particular token is not listed below, you might find it in the List of Parser Tokens.

& Bitwise Operators or References

What does it mean to start a PHP function with an ampersand?
Understanding PHP & (ampersand, bitwise and) operator
PHP "&" operator
Difference between & and && in PHP
What does "&" mean here in PHP?
What does "&" mean in this case?
What does the "&" sign mean in PHP?
What does this signature mean (&) in PHP?
How does the "&" operator work in a PHP function?
What does & in &2 mean in PHP?
When should I use a bitwise operator?
Is there ever a need to use ampersand in front of an object? (&$)
=& References

Reference assignment operator in PHP, =&
What do the "=&" and "&=" operators in PHP mean?
What do the '&=' and '=&' operators do?
What does =& mean in PHP?
&= Bitwise Operators

What do the "=&" and "&=" operators in PHP mean?
What do the '&=' and '=&' operators do?
&& Logical Operators

'AND' vs '&&' as operator
Difference between & and && in PHP
Is there any difference between "and" and "&&" operators in PHP?
PHP - and / or keywords
% Arithmetic Operators

What does the percent sign mean in PHP?
What is the PHP operator % and how do I use it in real-world examples?
!! Logical Operators

Double not (!!) operator in PHP
@ Error Control Operators

What is the use of the @ symbol in PHP?
'At' symbol before variable name in PHP: @$_POST
PHP functions and @functions
Should I use @ in my PHP code?
What does @ mean in PHP?
?: Ternary Operator

What are the PHP operators "?" and ":" called and what do they do?
?: operator (the 'Elvis operator') in PHP
Where can I read about conditionals done with "?" and ":" (colon)?
Using PHP 5.3 ?: operator
?? Null Coalesce Operator (since PHP 7)

C#'s null coalescing operator (??) in PHP
?string ?int ?array ?bool ?float Nullable return type declaration (since PHP 7.1)

Nullable return type declaration
: Alternative syntax for control structures, Ternary Operator

What is ":" in PHP?
What does ":" mean in PHP?
:: Scope Resolution Operator

What do two colons mean in PHP?
What's the meaning of the PHP token name T_PAAMAYIM_NEKUDOTAYIM?
What's the difference between :: (double colon) and -> (arrow) in PHP?
What exactly are late static bindings in PHP?
static::staticFunctionName()
Unexpected T_PAAMAYIM_NEKUDOTAYIM, expecting T_NS_Separator
\ Namespaces

Backslash in PHP -- what does it mean?
What does a \ (backslash) do in PHP (5.3+)?
-> Classes And Objects

What is the "->" PHP operator called and how do you say it when reading code out loud?
Where do we use the object operator "->" in PHP?
What's the difference between :: (double colon) and -> (arrow) in PHP?
What does the PHP syntax $var1->$var2 mean?
What does "->" mean/refer to in PHP?
=> Arrays

What does "=>" mean in PHP?
Use of => in PHP
What does $k => $v in foreach($ex as $k=>$v) mean?
^ Bitwise Operators

How does the bitwise operator XOR ('^') work?
What does ^ mean in PHP?
>> Bitwise Operators

What does >> mean in PHP?
<< Bitwise Operators

Strange print behaviour in PHP?
<<< Heredoc or Nowdoc

What does <<<END mean in PHP?
PHP expression <<<EOB
In PHP, what does "<<<" represent?
Using <<<CON in PHP
What's this kind of syntax in PHP?
= Assignment Operators

The 3 different equals
== Comparison Operators

How do the PHP equality (== double equals) and identity (=== triple equals) comparison operators differ?
PHP != and == operators
The 3 different equals
Type-juggling and (strict) greater/lesser-than comparisons in PHP
=== Comparison Operators

What does "===" mean?
How do the PHP equality (== double equals) and identity (=== triple equals) comparison operators differ?
The 3 different equals
Type-juggling and (strict) greater/lesser-than comparisons in PHP
!== Comparison Operators

What does !== comparison operator in PHP mean?
Is there a difference between !== and != in PHP?
!= Comparison Operators

PHP != and == operators
Is there a difference between !== and != in PHP?
comparing, !== versus !=
What is the difference between <> and !=
<> Comparison Operators

PHP operator <>
PHP's <> operator
What is the difference between <> and !=
Type-juggling and (strict) greater/lesser-than comparisons in PHP
<=> Comparison Operators (since PHP 7.0)

Spaceship (three way comparison) operator
| Bitwise Operators

What is the difference between the | and || operators?
What Does Using A Single Pipe '|' In A Function Argument Do?
|| Logical Operators

What is the difference between the | and || operators?
PHP - and / or keywords
What exactly does || mean?
The behaviour of the or operator in PHP
~ Bitwise Operators

What does this ~ operator mean here?
+ Arithmetic Operators, Array Operators

+ operator for array in PHP?
+= and -= Assignment Operators

What is += used for?
What does `$page -= 1` in my PHP document mean?
++ and -- Incrementing/Decrementing Operators

Understanding Incrementing
Answer below
.= Assignment Operators

What is the difference between .= and += in PHP?
To understand a line of PHP
. String Operators

Difference between period and comma when concatenating with echo versus return?
What does a . (dot) do in PHP?
, Function Arguments

Difference between period and comma when concatenating with echo versus return?
, Variable Declarations

What do commas mean in a variable declaration?
$$ Variable Variables

What does $$ (dollar dollar or double dollar) mean in PHP?
what is "$$" in PHP
$function() and $$variable
` Execution Operator

What are the backticks `` called?
<?= Short Open Tags

What does this symbol mean in PHP <?=
What does '<?=' mean in PHP?
What does <?= mean?
[] Arrays (short syntax since PHP 5.4)

PHP arrays... What is/are the meaning(s) of an empty bracket?
What is the meaning of []
Php array_push() vs myArray[]
What does [] mean when reading from a PHP array?
Shorthand for arrays: literal $var = [] empty array
<? Opening and Closing tags

Are PHP short tags acceptable to use?
... Argument unpacking (since PHP 5.6)

** Exponentiation (since PHP 5.6)

# One-line shell-style comment

Can I use hashes for comments in PHP?
:? Nullable return types

php method argument type hinting with question mark (?type)
php arguments operators symbols
shareedit
edited Dec 9 '19 at 5:15
community wiki
112 revs, 55 users 54%
Gordon
36
I know this isn't strictly PHP, but what about including a link to phpdoc.org for phpDocumentor comment syntax, which is commonly used and it's also impossible to search for /**? – Mike Aug 21 '11 at 2:25 
7
Can I suggest square bracket and curly bracket ? – ajreal Nov 26 '11 at 10:38
124
I ran into this problem a lot too (not being able to search for special characters), which is why I made SymbolHound, a search engine that doesn't ignore special characters. I also posted it on StackApps. – dncrane Dec 6 '11 at 18:34 
1
Well, from the heading Why is this?, I'd guess it's because "The main idea is to have links to existing questions on Stack Overflow, so it's easier for us to reference them". – Herbert Aug 26 '12 at 18:34
3
A question was asked today (Nov.20/15) stackoverflow.com/questions/33833259/what-is-rscat-in-php asking "What is $rsCat in php" (should that question still be made visible and not deleted). Strangely enough, there isn't a reference about $ variable, but about $$ Variable Variables only. I believe that should be amended somewhere. – Funk Forty Niner Nov 20 '15 at 18:19 
show 14 more comments
18 Answers
activeoldestvotes

1148

Incrementing / Decrementing Operators

++ increment operator

-- decrement operator

Example    Name              Effect
---------------------------------------------------------------------
++$a       Pre-increment     Increments $a by one, then returns $a.
$a++       Post-increment    Returns $a, then increments $a by one.
--$a       Pre-decrement     Decrements $a by one, then returns $a.
$a--       Post-decrement    Returns $a, then decrements $a by one.
These can go before or after the variable.

If put before the variable, the increment/decrement operation is done to the variable first then the result is returned. If put after the variable, the variable is first returned, then the increment/decrement operation is done.

For example:

$apples = 10;
for ($i = 0; $i < 10; ++$i) {
    echo 'I have ' . $apples-- . " apples. I just ate one.\n";
}
Live example

In the case above ++$i is used, since it is faster. $i++ would have the same results.

Pre-increment is a little bit faster because it really increments the variable and after that 'returns' the result. Post-increment creates a special variable, copies there the value of the first variable and only after the first variable is used, replaces its value with second's.

However, you must use $apples--, since first, you want to display the current number of apples, and then you want to subtract one from it.

You can also increment letters in PHP:

$i = "a";
while ($i < "c") {
    echo $i++;
}
Once z is reached aa is next, and so on.

Note that character variables can be incremented but not decremented and even so only plain ASCII characters (a-z and A-Z) are supported.

Stack Overflow Posts:

Understanding Incrementing
shareedit
edited Nov 12 '18 at 8:39
community wiki
16 revs, 9 users 80%
Peter Ajtai
9
+1 for the note that decrementers don't work on characters, only on numbers – Mark Baker Sep 17 '10 at 20:51
160
For everyone's sake, please remove the bolded information about pre-incrementing being infinitesimally faster. This is the absolute worst example of premature optimization and this kind of information should not be in people's heads if they are just starting to learn PHP. – Lotus Notes Dec 8 '10 at 23:49
13
@Lotus - I consider it a fun fact. If you're a beginner to PHP, or C++, etc, it seems pretty wacky that ++i and i++ are different enough to work at different speeds. I found it fascinating. – Peter Ajtai Dec 9 '10 at 10:47
12
@Peter Ajtai Yes, it's interesting, but from the way you've structured your post you make it seem like one of the prime facts of PHP that is absolutely vital to using the language. – Lotus Notes Dec 9 '10 at 17:43
3
Not sure if it is just me or not, but the apple example seems a little misleading. 'I have 10 apples. I just ate one' makes me believe you had 11 apples, but now you have 10 because you just ate one rather than you eating one after saying you have 10, thus making you have 9 -- which is what the code is implying. – さりげない告白 Nov 27 '15 at 12:59