# 0106. Error Codes and FQA

[Pomoc: Introduction (AutoLISP)](http://help.autodesk.com/view/OARX/2018/PLK/?guid=GUID-A0E9D801-8BE9-4BF1-85E8-3807E15F3B71)

## 01. Error Codes Reference (AutoLISP)

The following table shows the values of error codes generated by AutoLISP. The ERRNO system variable is set to one of these values when an AutoLISP function call causes an error that AutoCAD detects. AutoLISP applications can inspect the current value of ERRNO with (getvar "errno").

The ERRNO system variable is not always cleared to zero. Unless it is inspected immediately after an AutoLISP function has reported an error, the error that its value indicates may be misleading. This variable is always cleared when starting or opening a drawing.

Note: The possible values of ERRNO, and their meanings, are subject to change.

## 02. FAQ: What is the Difference Between Lightweight Polylines and Old-Style Polylines? (AutoLISP)

A lightweight polyline (lwpolyline) is defined in the drawing database as a single graphic entity unlike the old-style polyline, which is defined as a group of subentities.

Lwpolylines display faster and consume less disk space and RAM. As of AutoCAD Release 14, 3D polylines are always created as old-style polyline entities, and 2D polylines are created as lwpolyline entities, unless they are curved or fitted with the AutoCAD PEDIT command. When a drawing from an earlier release is opened in AutoCAD Release 14 or a later release, all 2D polylines convert to lwpolylines automatically, unless they have been curved or fitted or contain extended data (xdata).

## 03. FAQ: What Symbol Table Entries Cannot Be Renamed or Modified? (AutoLISP)

Most entries in the symbol tables can be renamed or modified with a few exceptions.

The following table shows which symbol table entries cannot be modified or renamed, except that most LAYER symbol table entries can be renamed and xdata can be modified on all symbol table entries.

## 04. FAQ: How Do I Process Curve-Fit and Spline-Fit Polylines? (AutoLISP)

An old-style polyline might contain vertices that were not created explicitly; these auxiliary vertices were inserted automatically by the AutoCAD PEDIT command's Fit and Spline options.

You can safely ignore these additional vertices when stepping through a polyline with entnext because changes to these vertices will be discarded the next time the AutoCAD PEDIT command is used to fit or convert the polyline to a spline. The old-style polyline entity's group code 70 flags indicate whether the polyline has been curve-fit (bit value 2) or spline-fit (bit value 4). If neither bit is set, all the polyline's vertices are regular user-defined vertices.

However, if the curve-fit bit (2) is set, alternating vertices of the polyline have the bit value 1 set in their 70 group code to indicate that they were inserted by the curve-fitting process. If you use entmod to move the vertices of such a polyline with the intent of refitting the curve by means of the AutoCAD PEDIT command, ignore these vertices.

Likewise, if the old-style polyline entity's spline-fit flag bit (bit 4) is set, an assortment of vertices will be found—some with flag bit 1 (inserted by curve fitting if the AutoCAD SPLINESEGS system variable was negative), some with bit value 8 (inserted by spline fitting), and all others with bit value 16 (spline frame-control point). Here again, if you use entmod to move the vertices and you intend to refit the spline afterward, move only the control-point vertices.

