## 01

## What does if __name__ == “__main__”: do?

[python - What does if __name__ == "__main__": do? - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/419163/what-does-if-name-main-do)

Given the following code, what does the if __name__ == "__main__": do?

# Threading example
import time, thread

def myfunction(string, sleeptime, lock, *args):
    while True:
        lock.acquire()
        time.sleep(sleeptime)
        lock.release()
        time.sleep(sleeptime)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    lock = thread.allocate_lock()
    thread.start_new_thread(myfunction, ("Thread #: 1", 2, lock))
    thread.start_new_thread(myfunction, ("Thread #: 2", 2, lock))
python namespaces main python-module idioms
shareedit
edited Feb 26 at 21:04

iliketocode
6,12744 gold badges3636 silver badges5151 bronze badges
asked Jan 7 '09 at 4:11

Devoted
79.4k3939 gold badges8080 silver badges109109 bronze badges
add a comment
31 Answers
activeoldestvotes
1 2 next

6352

Whenever the Python interpreter reads a source file, it does two things:

it sets a few special variables like __name__, and then

it executes all of the code found in the file.

Let's see how this works and how it relates to your question about the __name__ checks we always see in Python scripts.

Code Sample
Let's use a slightly different code sample to explore how imports and scripts work. Suppose the following is in a file called foo.py.

# Suppose this is foo.py.

print("before import")
import math

print("before functionA")
def functionA():
    print("Function A")

print("before functionB")
def functionB():
    print("Function B {}".format(math.sqrt(100)))

print("before __name__ guard")
if __name__ == '__main__':
    functionA()
    functionB()
print("after __name__ guard")
Special Variables
When the Python interpeter reads a source file, it first defines a few special variables. In this case, we care about the __name__ variable.

When Your Module Is the Main Program

If you are running your module (the source file) as the main program, e.g.

python foo.py
the interpreter will assign the hard-coded string "__main__" to the __name__ variable, i.e.

# It's as if the interpreter inserts this at the top
# of your module when run as the main program.
__name__ = "__main__" 
When Your Module Is Imported By Another

On the other hand, suppose some other module is the main program and it imports your module. This means there's a statement like this in the main program, or in some other module the main program imports:

# Suppose this is in some other main program.
import foo
The interpreter will search for your foo.py file (along with searching for a few other variants), and prior to executing that module, it will assign the name "foo" from the import statement to the __name__ variable, i.e.

# It's as if the interpreter inserts this at the top
# of your module when it's imported from another module.
__name__ = "foo"
Executing the Module's Code
After the special variables are set up, the interpreter executes all the code in the module, one statement at a time. You may want to open another window on the side with the code sample so you can follow along with this explanation.

Always

It prints the string "before import" (without quotes).

It loads the math module and assigns it to a variable called math. This is equivalent to replacing import math with the following (note that __import__ is a low-level function in Python that takes a string and triggers the actual import):

# Find and load a module given its string name, "math",
# then assign it to a local variable called math.
math = __import__("math")
It prints the string "before functionA".

It executes the def block, creating a function object, then assigning that function object to a variable called functionA.

It prints the string "before functionB".

It executes the second def block, creating another function object, then assigning it to a variable called functionB.

It prints the string "before __name__ guard".

Only When Your Module Is the Main Program

If your module is the main program, then it will see that __name__ was indeed set to "__main__" and it calls the two functions, printing the strings "Function A" and "Function B 10.0".
Only When Your Module Is Imported by Another

(instead) If your module is not the main program but was imported by another one, then __name__ will be "foo", not "__main__", and it'll skip the body of the if statement.
Always

It will print the string "after __name__ guard" in both situations.
Summary

In summary, here's what'd be printed in the two cases:

# What gets printed if foo is the main program
before import
before functionA
before functionB
before __name__ guard
Function A
Function B 10.0
after __name__ guard
# What gets printed if foo is imported as a regular module
before import
before functionA
before functionB
before __name__ guard
after __name__ guard
Why Does It Work This Way?
You might naturally wonder why anybody would want this. Well, sometimes you want to write a .py file that can be both used by other programs and/or modules as a module, and can also be run as the main program itself. Examples:

Your module is a library, but you want to have a script mode where it runs some unit tests or a demo.

Your module is only used as a main program, but it has some unit tests, and the testing framework works by importing .py files like your script and running special test functions. You don't want it to try running the script just because it's importing the module.

Your module is mostly used as a main program, but it also provides a programmer-friendly API for advanced users.

Beyond those examples, it's elegant that running a script in Python is just setting up a few magic variables and importing the script. "Running" the script is a side effect of importing the script's module.

Food for Thought
Question: Can I have multiple __name__ checking blocks? Answer: it's strange to do so, but the language won't stop you.

Suppose the following is in foo2.py. What happens if you say python foo2.py on the command-line? Why?

# Suppose this is foo2.py.

def functionA():
    print("a1")
    from foo2 import functionB
    print("a2")
    functionB()
    print("a3")

def functionB():
    print("b")

print("t1")
if __name__ == "__main__":
    print("m1")
    functionA()
    print("m2")
print("t2")
Now, figure out what will happen if you remove the __name__ check in foo3.py:
# Suppose this is foo3.py.

def functionA():
    print("a1")
    from foo3 import functionB
    print("a2")
    functionB()
    print("a3")

def functionB():
    print("b")

print("t1")
print("m1")
functionA()
print("m2")
print("t2")
What will this do when used as a script? When imported as a module?
# Suppose this is in foo4.py
__name__ = "__main__"

def bar():
    print("bar")

print("before __name__ guard")
if __name__ == "__main__":
    bar()
print("after __name__ guard")
shareedit
edited Feb 6 at 15:29
answered Jan 7 '09 at 4:26

Mr Fooz
82.9k44 gold badges6262 silver badges9494 bronze badges
10
Out of curiosity: What hapens if I run subprocess.run('foo_bar.py') in a python script? I suppose that foo_bar will be started with __name__ = '__main__' just like when I tipe foo_bar.py in cmd manually. Is that the case? Taking @MrFooz' Answer into account there should not be any problem doing this and having as many "main" modules at a time as I like. Even changing the __name__ value or having several independantly creates instances (or instances that created each other by subprocess) interact with each other should be business as usual for Python. Do I miss something? – hajef Feb 18 '19 at 16:09 
8
@hajef You're correct about how things would work with subprocess.run. That said, a generally better way of sharing code between scripts is to create modules and have the scripts call the shared modules instead of invoking each other as scripts. It's hard to debug subprocess.run calls since most debuggers don't jump across process boundaries, it can add non-trivial system overhead to create and destroy the extra processes, etc. – Mr Fooz Feb 19 '19 at 16:16
3
i have a doubt in foo2.py example in the food for thought section.what does from foo2.py import functionB do? In my view it just imports foo2.py from functionB – user471651 Feb 24 '19 at 13:47
1
One of the modules that may import your code is multiprocessing, in particular making this test necessary on Windows. – Yann Vernier Sep 17 '19 at 15:51
show 3 more comments

1755

When your script is run by passing it as a command to the Python interpreter,

python myscript.py
all of the code that is at indentation level 0 gets executed. Functions and classes that are defined are, well, defined, but none of their code gets run. Unlike other languages, there's no main() function that gets run automatically - the main() function is implicitly all the code at the top level.

In this case, the top-level code is an if block. __name__ is a built-in variable which evaluates to the name of the current module. However, if a module is being run directly (as in myscript.py above), then __name__ instead is set to the string "__main__". Thus, you can test whether your script is being run directly or being imported by something else by testing

if __name__ == "__main__":
    ...
If your script is being imported into another module, its various function and class definitions will be imported and its top-level code will be executed, but the code in the then-body of the if clause above won't get run as the condition is not met. As a basic example, consider the following two scripts:

# file one.py
def func():
    print("func() in one.py")

print("top-level in one.py")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print("one.py is being run directly")
else:
    print("one.py is being imported into another module")
# file two.py
import one

print("top-level in two.py")
one.func()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print("two.py is being run directly")
else:
    print("two.py is being imported into another module")
Now, if you invoke the interpreter as

python one.py
The output will be

top-level in one.py
one.py is being run directly
If you run two.py instead:

python two.py
You get

top-level in one.py
one.py is being imported into another module
top-level in two.py
func() in one.py
two.py is being run directly
Thus, when module one gets loaded, its __name__ equals "one" instead of "__main__".

## 02. How to make a flat list out of list of lists?

[python - How to make a flat list out of list of lists? - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/952914/how-to-make-a-flat-list-out-of-list-of-lists)

I wonder whether there is a shortcut to make a simple list out of list of lists in Python.

I can do that in a for loop, but maybe there is some cool "one-liner"? I tried it with reduce(), but I get an error.

Code

l = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7], [8, 9]]
reduce(lambda x, y: x.extend(y), l)
Error message

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <lambda>
AttributeError: 'NoneType' object has no attribute 'extend'
python list multidimensional-array flatten
shareedit
edited Oct 16 '19 at 21:13

martineau
83.5k1717 gold badges113113 silver badges214214 bronze badges
asked Jun 4 '09 at 20:30

Emma
32.4k44 gold badges1515 silver badges1010 bronze badges
16
There's an in-depth discussion of this here: rightfootin.blogspot.com/2006/09/more-on-python-flatten.html, discussing several methods of flattening arbitrarily nested lists of lists. An interesting read! – RichieHindle Jun 4 '09 at 20:41 
6
Some other answers are better but the reason yours fails is that the 'extend' method always returns None. For a list with length 2, it will work but return None. For a longer list, it will consume the first 2 args, which returns None. It then continues with None.extend(<third arg>), which causes this erro – mehtunguh Jun 11 '13 at 21:48 
show 1 more comment
40 Answers
activeoldestvotes
1 2 next

4525

Given a list of lists l,

flat_list = [item for sublist in l for item in sublist]

which means:

flat_list = []
for sublist in l:
    for item in sublist:
        flat_list.append(item)
is faster than the shortcuts posted so far. (l is the list to flatten.)

Here is the corresponding function:

flatten = lambda l: [item for sublist in l for item in sublist]
As evidence, you can use the timeit module in the standard library:

$ python -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99' '[item for sublist in l for item in sublist]'
10000 loops, best of 3: 143 usec per loop
$ python -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99' 'sum(l, [])'
1000 loops, best of 3: 969 usec per loop
$ python -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99' 'reduce(lambda x,y: x+y,l)'
1000 loops, best of 3: 1.1 msec per loop
Explanation: the shortcuts based on + (including the implied use in sum) are, of necessity, O(L**2) when there are L sublists -- as the intermediate result list keeps getting longer, at each step a new intermediate result list object gets allocated, and all the items in the previous intermediate result must be copied over (as well as a few new ones added at the end). So, for simplicity and without actual loss of generality, say you have L sublists of I items each: the first I items are copied back and forth L-1 times, the second I items L-2 times, and so on; total number of copies is I times the sum of x for x from 1 to L excluded, i.e., I * (L**2)/2.

The list comprehension just generates one list, once, and copies each item over (from its original place of residence to the result list) also exactly once.

shareedit
edited Mar 29 '19 at 10:29

user1854182
42611 gold badge55 silver badges99 bronze badges
answered Jun 4 '09 at 20:37

Alex Martelli
691k139139 gold badges10951095 silver badges13071307 bronze badges
459
I tried a test with the same data, using itertools.chain.from_iterable : $ python -mtimeit -s'from itertools import chain; l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99' 'list(chain.from_iterable(l))'. It runs a bit more than twice as fast as the nested list comprehension that's the fastest of the alternatives shown here. – intuited Oct 15 '10 at 1:21 
262
I found the syntax hard to understand until I realized you can think of it exactly like nested for loops. for sublist in l: for item in sublist: yield item – Rob Crowell Jul 27 '11 at 16:43
22
@BorisChervenkov: Notice that I wrapped the call in list() to realize the iterator into a list. – intuited May 20 '12 at 22:56
155
[leaf for tree in forest for leaf in tree] might be easier to comprehend and apply. – John Mee Aug 29 '13 at 1:38 
75
@Joel, actually nowadays list(itertools.chain.from_iterable(l)) is best -- as noticed in other comments and Shawn's answer. – Alex Martelli Jan 4 '15 at 15:40
show 24 more comments

1493

You can use itertools.chain():

>>> import itertools
>>> list2d = [[1,2,3], [4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]
>>> merged = list(itertools.chain(*list2d))
Or you can use itertools.chain.from_iterable() which doesn't require unpacking the list with the * operator:

>>> import itertools
>>> list2d = [[1,2,3], [4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]
>>> merged = list(itertools.chain.from_iterable(list2d))
This approach is arguably more readable than [item for sublist in l for item in sublist] and appears to be faster too:

$ python3 -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99;import itertools' 'list(itertools.chain.from_iterable(l))'
20000 loops, best of 5: 10.8 usec per loop
$ python3 -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99' '[item for sublist in l for item in sublist]'
10000 loops, best of 5: 21.7 usec per loop
$ python3 -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99' 'sum(l, [])'
1000 loops, best of 5: 258 usec per loop
$ python3 -mtimeit -s'l=[[1,2,3],[4,5,6], [7], [8,9]]*99;from functools import reduce' 'reduce(lambda x,y: x+y,l)'
1000 loops, best of 5: 292 usec per loop
$ python3 --version
Python 3.7.5rc1
shareedit
edited Nov 24 '19 at 23:53

Boris
3,05244 gold badges2828 silver badges4141 bronze badges
answered Jun 4 '09 at 21:06

Shawn Chin
66.7k1616 gold badges147147 silver badges177177 bronze badges
11
The * is the tricky thing that makes chain less straightforward than the list comprehension. You have to know that chain only joins together the iterables passed as parameters, and the * causes the top-level list to be expanded into parameters, so chain joins together all those iterables, but doesn't descend further. I think this makes the comprehension more readable than the use of chain in this case. – Tim Dierks Sep 3 '14 at 14:13 
41
@TimDierks: I'm not sure "this requires you to understand Python syntax" is an argument against using a given technique in Python. Sure, complex usage could confuse, but the "splat" operator is generally useful in many circumstances, and this isn't using it in a particularly obscure way; rejecting all language features that aren't necessarily obvious to beginning users means you're tying one hand behind your back. May as well throw out list comprehensions too while you're at it; users from other backgrounds would find a for loop that repeatedly appends more obvious. – ShadowRanger Nov 12 '15 at 20:26 
1
reduce(lambda x,y: x+y,l) could be replaced with reduce(operator.add, l) – Cristian Ciupitu Apr 13 '18 at 18:42
show 3 more comments